---
layout: post
title: Free RTOS
published: true
---

FreeRTOS is a real-time operating system kernel for embedded systems. It stands for "Free Real Time Operating System"
and is an open source platform. It makes small, low-power edge devices easy to program, deploy, secure, connect and manage.
Since I use STM32 microcontrollers a lot, I want to try to explain what RTOS is with respect to microcontroller system design.

<!--Multitasking operating systems -->

Computers were costly back in the days and therefore people started to find ways to share expensive computers among many users.
This led to the invention of the multi-user operating system. 
The computer time was splitted up into slots where each slot was assigned to different user.
Because each slot was very short, the users didn't recognize its program was interrupted by other users.
The computers ran tasks in parallel.
Operating systems were used to ensure that the shared resources (each slot) were managed correctly and the data of different users were held separately.
Shared resources (slots) were equipments like e.g. printers.
If two users wanted to print to the same printer, the operating system had to schedule one printout task after each other, otherwise it would have printed a mixture of all the documents.

In microcontroller programming, we don't want many users in one CPU.
If we allow one user to get more than one time slot of the computer time, he can attach different tasks to each slot.
If he does that, he have so called "multitasking operating system" that runs many tasks in parallel.
This is usually exactly what we need for a embedded system, because most of our projects have some tasks running in parallel.

Later on, the multi-processor computers came, that made it possible for the operating system to distribute tasks,
not only to time-slots but also to different processors. Current computers and smart phones all run multitasking
and multi-processor operating systems to allow us to use many applications in parallel in an optimized way.
It is possible to run task manager on windows to see how this is done. You can also write htop on raspberry pi.
A ton of different tasks can be seen running in parallel, also if you are the only user.
It can be seen that the tasks are distributed to all of the cores of the CPU.
More and more operating systems execute tasks like networking in the background.
In the background means, their priority is lower, and they only run whenever the higher priority tasks wait for something.

When controlling a machine, a fast reaction time is needed, and waiting for the next time slot is not an option.
The computer has to react in real-time.
These specialized operating systems are called Real-Time Operating Systems (RTOS).
RTOS are:
* Multitasking systems
* Not often multi-user systems
* Linux and Windows are not RTOS and should not be used for time critical applications.

STM32 have:
* Single and dual CPU/Core
* Do not use an operating system
* No multitasking unless you have dual CPU.

A single core CPU can only run one sketch at a time and does not use an operating system.
Using interrupts, they can react nearly real-time to events.
Basically, microcontrollers are where computers were in 1960.
But we can write sketches that behave like multitasking systems.
To be able to do that we have to write non-blocking code which means we cannot use delay statements, because
they would block the microcontroller from executing a parallel task.
While loops can also not be used because they can loop for a long time and block other tasks.
To make a non-blocking code we would need to make an state-machine that requires a lot of additional code
and the sketches are hard to read because they are a mixture of tasks and operating system. 
This coding becomes very complex and therefore the FreeRTOS was invented and can be used instead.
It makes the coding process much easier and optimized.

What RTOS has to offer is:
* Time slot management to run tasks in parallel
* Protection that tasks are kept separated
* Task-To-Task communication
* Sharing of common resources like a display
* Fast reaction time using interrupts
* Background process execution using priorities

FreeRTOS is open source and runs on many different MCU architectures. 
We can create a very good program by only using the functions that FreeRTOS offers, [Link to API](https://www.freertos.org/a00021.html).
STM32 have RTOS built-in because WiFi and networking are time-critical. Same with ESP32.
STM32 and ESP32 decided to use RTOS to manage these tasks.
The networking runs on core 0 and the other part of the program runs on core 1.
ESP8266 does not have RTOS built-in and developers had to add yield() command into right places so the MCU wouldn't crash.
Because ESP8266 had no RTOS and only one core, the code could block WiFi and crash the MCU.
Adding yield() here and there in the code gave the WiFi the possibility to take over.
Since ESP32 has built-in RTOS, WiFi always runs in parallel to our sketches and we don't have to care.
The code in ESP32 can block as much as it wants and WiFi still works, same with STM32.




...Post in progress...



<!-- 
* https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=684KSAvYbw4

-->
