---
layout: post
title: Connecting Flysky remote to A2212 motor for drones
published: true
---

The Flysky i6X remote can be used as a universal drone controller and it comes with FS-iA10B receiver, which can be connected to a ESD (electronic speed drive) and
used to control the speed of A2212/13T 1000kV motors or any other motors using PWM (pulse width modulation).

When FS-iA10B (the receiver) is turned on for the first time, the led on the device will blink slowly.
This means the device is not fully connected to the transmitter.
When you power up the Flysky transmitter there is still no connection between the transmitter and the receiver.
To connect your transmitter and your receiver together you have to do the following:

* Connect the S-bus and the ground together and keep the Flysky remote off.
  Remember that the + is always the middle pin of the three on your receiver.
* Now, hold down the bind key on the remote, while you hold it down, turn it on.
* The led on the receiver should now showing stable red light. This means the connection is succesful.
* You can now remove the connection between the S-bus and the ground.

The pwm signal that is used to control the speed of the A2212 motor is sent out from channel 3 on the receiver.
The pwm signal is $$t=20ms$$ or $$f = 50Hz$$.

$$
t = \frac{1}{f} = \frac{1}{50} = 0.02s = 20ms
$$

The magnitude of the channels of the transmitter can be visualized by going to the display menu:

* On the transmitter, press ok for few seconds,
* Press up and go to functions setup.
* Go down to display and there you can see the magnitude of each channel of the remote.

...post in progress...

#### Useful links

[1] FPV DroneWorks. YouTube. [Link](https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=B-qiJi_k25o)

[2] The Drone Dojo. YouTube. [Link](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l8rjjvAZvHM)
